# Conclusions

Working on the idea I presented in this work was a challenging experience. The
whole project took around 7 months[^last7months]. During this time we went from
a concept to a real prototype. We did a lot of iterations on the different aspects
of the application functionalities. Prototyping the client was especially
challenging because of the user experience we wanted to achieve. Besides the
technical challenges, working on this project required the presence of a lot of
research before any development was done.

The outcomes of the research played a major role in prioritizing the features
for the initial version and the available time we can spend on it. With this in
mind, we developed new approaches on how we can deliver software faster and
better. We created automated work-flows and learned to write specifications
and use these to successfully communicate between the back-end and front-end
teams. By automating the tedious tasks we helped everyone stay focus and
motivated, which also saved a lot of time.

## Learning outcomes

Probably the lessons with the biggest impact I could learn from working on the
project are related to the concept of _product development_. Unfortunately this
is not taught at the universities, but it changed my perspective on how a
software application should be written. As a developer, previously I was (but I
suspect a lot of us still do this) rarely thinking about the purpose of a
software functionality and why at all, it should exist. Product development
made me realise that the main purpose why the software exists, is to help
people solve problems faster and easier. That is why every aspect of the
programming needs to follow this meaning. That is why programmers should not
design software without designers and front-end developers, otherwise we just
agree to forget we are building software for humans: for my mum, for my teacher
or for my future kids.

Beyond solving the technical problems and understanding how to delivered our
first version faster, working in a startup was a lot of fun. I was exposed to
concerns that made me a more organised person, a better leader and a thoughtful
enabler. I learned that communication, not just at the programming level, but
team-wise, plays an important role in every day team motivation to build
something great. In the end, I met new people, people I could listen to and
learn a lot of things from. This is because of the startup culture that is
oriented towards sharing the knowledge and experience. During this time, I also
met some of the best people I will probably ever work with and learn from. I
feel great I can call them my friends.

## Further work

The project is now open source[^founden]. All our work and everything we
learned is now available for everyone. Over time, the project received some
attention, but not enough to become popular. In the same time and later, other
similar projects were born. Some of those are proprietary software, some of
them are open source projects too. Unfortunately none of these projects is
directly looking to provide an alternative to email in the first place. I
highly recommend considering one of the popular projects for further
contributions, simply because of the adoption rate and the user-base. Still,
some of the companies and projects interesting for the same subject we were and
worth mentioning are:

 * JMAP, a JSON API for email services from FastMail[^fastmail], http://jmap.io
 * Switchboard, an email processing framework by Mainframe.co[^mainframeco],
   http://switchboard.spatch.co
